# Minutes of the OGC O&M SWG meeting 16 October 2019

Time: 2019-10-16 at 11:00 EET

Place: Remotely (GoToMeeting), [recording](https://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=90749) available in the OGC Portal (requires Portal access).

Participants (voting members in bold):

* **Ilkka Rinne** (IR)
* **Kathi Schleidt** (KS)
* **Hylke van der Schaaf** (by proxy to Kathi)
* **Sylvain Grellet** (by proxy to Kathi)
* **Clemens Portele** (by proxy Ilkka)
* **Alistair Ritchie (AR)**

Status: approved (2020-01-22)


## 1. Check for quorum, patent call
IR noted that three voting members were present in person, and with proxies from Hylke, Sylvain and Clemens the quorum was reached with six represented voting members.

IR made the patents call, there were none.


## 2. Change Request Proposal status + Github issue cross check
IR and KS concluded the no new change requests had been submitted in the Standards Tracker since the previous meeting, and the cut-off date for the new change request proposals had been passed, the SWG could now work with only the Github issues.


## 3. Discussion on ISO 19156 document parts
IR showed the requirements class issue in Github (#25) and briefed the participants on it. KS commented that she like the idea of added structure, but the splitting at the XML schema level using very similar namespace prefixes would cause problems as especially for people with dyslexia. AR noted that the requirements class grouping and how that is implemented in XML Schema are different things. KS clarified that she was trying to avoid unnecessary complexity. Based on her INSPIRE experiences she was also concerned about software tools not being able to handle class hierarchies well.

AR told that he like the modular approach. He suggested that since the SOSA was defined by the OGC, we could take that as essentially a lift-and-shift and reconcile that with the O&M 2 and say that here is our core model and put the parts creating more controversy into separate extensions. Having a standard core that allows for extensions by communities that need specific functionality, such as perhaps the potential observation. AR argued that it was not unreasonable for the working group to come up with an abstract core mode allowing this kind of extensions.

IR noted that there could be practical issues if the extensions of the core would extend the core Observation class by introducing new properties to it. In some cases implementers would want to include a particular subset of the extensions, and thus would need to essentially use properties inherited from multiple Observation parent classes. He suggested that instead of having the extensions extend the Observation class, the extensions would further specify the requirements for the type and the content of the core Observation properties.

KS noted that having an abstract Observation with all the properties but with a relaxed cardinality and extending this by restriction would be a way to solve the issue of core and extensions to the Observation class. AR argued that defining strict cardinalities in the abstract model was unnecessarily restrictive, and as Simon [Cox] had pointed out in the Github comments for the Potential observation issue (#18). The cardinalities should be checked in run-time for the data object instances instead. He continued, that in this case the Observation UML class in the core would indeed have the cardinality of 0..* for all the properties.

KS brought up a related issue of the specialized observations: She argued that in INSPIRE the model of extending the Observation class in the XML Schemas for the various specialized observations went seriously overboard. In practice the defined specialized observation types created additional complexity, but were not enough to capture the sampling feature the the result details required in the various use cases. A better approach would be using soft-typing for the specialized Observations with a "type" property pointing to a code list in a public registry with definitions on the specific requirements for each observation type. AR agreed that this kind of referred typing would be a good idea: he was not a fan of specializing classes when you don't really change the information that's being carried. In many cases the O&M has been extended for no real gain, for he was not sure if for example the WaterML / TimeseriesML needed to exist. KS asked if anyone had information on the status of the OGC registry for the Observation types. IR replied that he had no info on that.

IR pointed out that the question regarding the soft vs. hard typing was about the mechanism for specifying the expected result type for the Observations. Having the result type clearly defined for a particular type of the Observation is really useful for the software developers. AR noted that in the current O&M XML encoding standard Schematron rules are used in addition to the O&M XML schemas to define the result types. On the other hand if the specialized observations are added into the OGC RDF kind of registry they are modelled there as subclasses of the basic Observation, so in essence the class hierarchy is then created anyway. He added that we could as well add these in the abstract UML model as separate classes, and use the soft typing to implement it in the encodings. KS asked if it would make sense to explicitly use the soft typing already in the UML model with a dedicated "type" property, since all the encodings are using that anyway. IR replied that the O&M UML model was intended to be a conceptual model, and that the soft vs. hard typing is an implementation level issue.

IR continued with a question of how easy would it be to implement a JSON schema where you could state that conditionally based on the value of the type property you should have a particular structure for the result property. AR argued that it would make more sense for the communities that have strict requirements on the data validation such as this to be using the XML encoding rather that a JSON one.

IR brought the discussion back to question of which properties to include in the core Observation. Even with the minimum multiplicity of zero, the client software would in practice have to support all of them. AR noted that the new properties currently on the table for the revised version, including the separated sampling feature and the ultimate FoI, sensor vs. procedure and the stimulus time, should be included in the core Observation.

KS asked whether is would idea to add the Platform concept of the SOSA into the O&M model, she had spent too much time explaining if her sample was a monitoring station. AR replied that he was in favour of adding it. KS noted that she had just added issues about adding the Platform as well as about using soft or hard typing of Observations. KS added a new Github issue on adding the Platform.

IR summarised the discussion by stating that the idea of a splitting the ISO 19156 into a core and extensions seemed to resonate well with the participants, and that there should be a clear migration guidance included for the applications moving from the O&M version 2 to version 3. He continued with asking the participant's ideas on which parts of the current 19156 document and the proposed new parts should be included in the revised 19156. KS replied by asking if how much we should keep relying into using SensorML, and if anyone knew how much SensorML was actually used in practice. She argued that adding a process concept simpler than SensorML was one of the added benefits introduced in the INSPIRE O&M data model. IR agreed, and added that the INSPIRE model also models the properties in  very basic way. KS added the this was done by Dom [Lowe] and Simon [Cox], and that based on her experience the INSPIRE properties model was not very easy to implement when defining derived properties. In theory the model works great, but in practice defining the properties as parent child hierarchies is complicated if the applications are supposed to be able to automatically navigate the defined property semantic networks in order to query the data.

AR commented that being able to define very specific observed properties, such as the peak wind gust in a minute, fills real interoperability needs, and thus should be supported. He also agreed that the detailed ontology for derived and related properties would probably be a good candidate for an extension rather that to be included in the core model due to it's complexity. IR and AR agreed that for the core it would be enough to have a hook for the observed property extension in place. KS argued that there was still the open issue of whether the object of interest should be part of the observed property or a separate property. AR replied that by making the object of interest (such as "Ph" for the property "Ph H2O") a direct property of Observation we would be normalising our world. KS replied by yes and no: the situation would be very similar with the question of lumping the property and the method together or keeping them separate: if the application has to resolve an external resource to determine the connected pieces (such as the observed property and the object of interest, or the property and the method), it makes the implementation more difficult than when these connected pieces would be directly available via separate properties. If an exact match of the observed property name is required for returning the observations, the querying application would first have to use an en external ontology or a registry to get all the exact property names for a particular object of interest (such as a Nitrogen), and then query the observations matching any of these property names. AR agreed that this was an issue, but that it probably should or even could not be solved within the context of the ISO 19156. KS commented that the discussion seemed to suggest that the detailed property model would also be a good candidate for a separate sub part of the standard parallel to sampling. KS and AR agreed that there would be need for an extension to solve the observed property query issue, but that it was out of scope for the O&M SWG.

IR brought the discussion back to the issue of the document parts to propose for the revised 19156. KS argued that defining the sampling as a separate part of the standard would make it easier for people to understand that the sampling feature was not mandatory when using the O&M data model. IR noted that it might be possible to turn the 19156 into a multi-part standard, but that would mean quite a bit of additional paper work. AR commented that he was ok for getting the new O&M core and the sampling parts released at same time, but it would be problematic if the only the core standard would be released first. IR agreed that the group needed to address both the core and the sampling, but he argued that perhaps the release of these parts would not have to be simultaneous, if both parts were on a public roadmap. He continued be argue that as the 19156 is an abstract model, it would not force the encodings to change immediately. AR commented that he did not understand why handling both parts simultaneously was not achievable. KS said that the question was how far would we want to align sampling with SOSA. If done properly, that would take some time, as the SOSA concepts would have to be modelled as UML and commonly agreed with. KS argued that it could be done and that she would be happy with it, but considering the open issues on the observation event side, she did not think it could be done by Christmas. AR told that he was slightly surprised to see that considerable modelling would need to done for the O&M 3 to address the issues that were mostly already addressed in SOSA. Of course the main issue was that none of the group members would be able to work on this full-time. Thus he told that he would rather see the group to first focus on the modernising the O&M and not introducing a lot of new functionality such as the detailed observed property model, and address the new functionality in subsequent modelling exercises.

IR asked whether the group would like to request an extension to the ISO 19156 committee draft submission deadline in order to address both the observation event and the sampling parts within the same specification (as separate conformance classes). AR was in favour of this, stating that he thought that these could not be released separately. KS summarised the discussion by stating that the observation core and the sampling would be kept together, and the observable properties would then be addressed separately. She continued be arguing that the closer we would stick with SOSA, the more the underlying data modelling language would be RDF instead of UML, which would be an argument for using soft-typing rather than hard-typing for the specialised observations. KS told that she could see herself as capable of turning the SOSA data model into UML, but more time would be needed for doing this than until the end of the year. IR asked whether by referring to SOSA we meant the current SOSA specification or SOSA with extensions. AR replied that some SOSA extensions would have to included to address the issues identified for the O&M revision work, but also to not downgrade the functionality from the O&M 2. KS commented that as far as she understood the only SOSA extensions identified as in-scope at that point were the ultimate feature of interest and the observation collection.

IR asked whether the participants would prefer separate, but simultaneously released ISO specification parts for the core observation and the sampling or a including them as two conformance classes within a single ISO specification. AR commented that the group should ask Scott [Simmons] for his opinion on this. IR commented that it would probably be easier to define two conformance (or requirements) classes within a single specification than trying to get two specification parts released at the same time. IR pointed out that it would be important to be able to convert back and forth between the O&M 2 and 3 versions. AR agreed.

In general considering the tight schedule AR was in favour of picking from existing thinking as much as possible in contrast to trying to conceptualise that whole thing.

## 4. ISO 19156 proposed changes document: tasking and schedule
There was no time to go though the issue tasking, so IR proposed to agree by email or using the Github issue assignments on how to make progress in solving the issues before the Toulouse TC. He also promised to check with ISO and Scott on their views about the 19156 structure and the possible splitting into separate specification parts. IR noted that as discussed in the previous meetings, after the Toulouse TC the O&M SWG should be able to estimate whether the foreseen work could be achieved by the end of the year, or if the timeline would have to be extended. He said he had agreed with Mats Åhlin that the December ISO/TC 211 meeting would be a good time to check if more time would be needed. KS noted that she was just concerned that bringing this up in December would be too late. IR told that he would open the discussion on the timeline issues with Mats Åhlin along with the specification parts discussion. He asked if three additional months (until the end of March) would be enough to get the specification done? KS replied that it would be doable, but she would have to use her Christmas vacation time for this work. IR summarised that he would then propose a three months extension to finish the CD version of 19156 based on the SOSA conceptual basis remodelled as UML, with separate conformance classes for the core and the sampling. The core would contain the additional concepts about the observation collections, the template/potental observations, and the few non-mandatory properties previously discussed.

## 5. Re-charter status
IR told that he had not heard a confirmation that the TC email vote for approving the O&M SWG re-charter had been initiated, but neither had he heard of any problems about it. He promised to ask Scott more details about how the vote was proceeding.

## 6. Other issues
AR asked about the plan for the Toulouse meeting: was there an intention to have a side session where there would be time for a proper discussion and white-boarding? IR agreed that in addition to the 1.5 hour session of Monday morning, the group would need more time for detailed discussion. AR noted that there was often a possibility to meet on Fridays of the TC meetings.
